

Me and HP calculators		    (first posted on reddit, February 2026)

The first calculator in my family was when my dad (a physics prof in
his mid-fifties) convinced my mother in 1973 that he could pay for the
just-released HP-35 ($400!) by selling his expensive back volumes of
Physical Review.  That never happened, but he absolutely loved the
calculator.  For a guy that had been solving Really Hard Problems for
forty years using his slide rule, it was nothing short of miraculous.
He even loved that it got the square root of 4 "wrong" (3.9999...),
because he well understood accuracy, and precision, and that that
answer had plenty of both, for the real world.  He wasn't as happy
that the trig functions only worked with degrees though.  Can't have
everything!  He used it for a long time.  I still have it -- it worked
until a few years ago, but not anymore.

I borrowed that HP-35 a lot during the tail end of high school, and
when I was heading off to study and do something in science or
engineering, my folks gave me an HP-25C for graduation.  I was
thrilled.  I remember I took it along on my bike one day, and headed
across town to a local park by the river.  I sat at a picnic table for
a couple of hours reading the manual, learning to use it, and writing
my first program (ever!) on it.  (Then I got to college, and had
access to "real" computers.  I don't think I ever wrote another
program on the HP-25.) I loved the form factor, and the keyboard feel.
As an engineering student, I also loved "ENG" display mode:  much like
"scientific", which I knew from the HP-35, but with the exponent
constrained to multiples of 3.  Perfect when calculating picojoules
from megahertz, or whatever it was I was doing back then.

The HP-25 died too early a death.  By then I was into my career as a
firmware / embedded / OS-level programmer.  Floating point wasn't even
on my radar.  When I eventually got a new calculator, the natural
choice was the HP-16C, with bitwise operations, variable word length,
multiple bases.  Perfect...  except that I hardly ever used it.
Somehow I just never really needed what it could do, and reaching for
a standalone device when I had the entire power of UNIX, the shell,
and C at my fingertips never felt right.  Not to mention dc, bc, awk,
etc.  I never really bonded with the HP-16 like I did with the other
two.  But I do still have it, and it still works, and I think it's
only on its second set of batteries.  (!)

Anyway, that's my calculator story.  I did apply my skills to writing
my own, when I decided dc and bc just weren't satisfying my particular
needs.  Like them, it's text-based, but it's a handy tool.  And of
course it was influenced by the HPs that I'd used.  I started it a
long time ago, but have been working on it a lot again lately (as a
substitute for doom-scrolling, I think -- everyone needs an engrossing
hobby these days), and I realized that I've incorporated many features
from every one of those three HP calculators, which is sort of
amusing, and fitting.  It's "foxharp/rca" on github, but that's not
really why I wrote all this.  I came across dad's calculator the other
day, and mainly I just felt like reminiscing.

-pgf

